Prodigy demo (#17)
nestauk/dap_tutorials: prodigy_demo/README.md

## 🪄 Prodigy have-a-go session

In this have-a-go session we will explore **Prodigy**, a data annotation tool by [Explosion AI](https://explosion.ai/) (the creators of [spaCy](https://spacy.io/)). Prodigy allows you to flexibly annotate data: text, images, video and audio.

> In order to use Prodigy for your annotation tasks you need a license. We have 5 seats in the Data Science Practice, which are freely transferrable within the company. However, if you do need a license for a project, please join Nesta's `#prodigy` slack channel and ask for a license key.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In order to use Prodigy for your annotation tasks you need a license. We have 5 seats in the Data Science Practice, which are freely transferrable within the company. However, if you do need a license for a project, please join Nesta's `#dsp-prodigy` slack channel and ask for a license key.
```

### 🛠️ Setup

Run the following on your command line before the have-a-go session:
1. If you don't have this repo in your local computer run: `git clone https://github.com/nestauk/dap_tutorials.git`; Otherwise open this repo locally and run `git fetch origin`;
2. `cd YOUR_LOCAL_PATH/dap_tutorials/prodigy_demo/` where `YOUR_LOCAL_PATH` is your local path to your repos' folder;
2. `conda create --name prodigy_demo python=3.9`
3. `conda activate prodigy_demo`
4. `pip install -r requirements.txt`

> 5. `pip install -r ./llm_requirements/requirements.txt` - specific requirements for the llm recipe;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
5. `pip install -r ./llm_recipe/llm_requirements.txt` - specific requirements for the llm recipe;
```

6. `echo OPENAI_KEY=<YOUR_API_KEY> >> .env` where `YOUR_API_KEY` is your OpenAI API key (we will make one available for you);
6. If you do have a Prodigy license key run `python -m pip install prodigy -f https://XXXX-XXXX-XXXX-XXXX@download.prodi.gy`. If you don't, someone in your have-a-go session group will have.

### 💡 This *have-a-go*

> 

Reviewer: love <3

In this *have-a-go session* we will cover:
- the basics of Prodigy: what it is, what it can be used for, the front end of a basic recipe, input and output files, handling multiple annotators and pros and cons of Prodigy;
- [enhancing a basic text annotation recipe](basic_recipe/);
- [using LLMs in a recipe](llm_recipe/);
- [creating a recipe with multiple annotation tasks and making small enhancements that improve the annotators' experience](multiple_tasks_recipe/).

### 👶 What is Prodigy?

> 
> **Prodigy** is a annotation tool, typically used to create training and test data for machine learning models. There's a Python library that enables you to customise your annotation environment: the questions you ask, the annotation labels available, how the data is loaded and saved, and the behaviour of your front end application.

Reviewer: ```suggestion

Let's go into a bit more detail about Prodigy. 

**Prodigy** is a annotation tool, typically used to create training and test data for machine learning models. There's a Python library that enables you to customise your annotation environment: the questions you ask, the annotation labels available, how the data is loaded and saved, and the behaviour of your front end application.
```

Reviewer: adding this sentence as you already briefly define what prodigy is above

The data can then be manually annotated by a group of annotators or enhanced with semi-automated processes such as **active learning** to speed up the annotation process.

> It's important to note that Prodigy isn't free or open source. Nesta's Data Science Practice purchased 5 Prodigy seats, which are transferrable within the company.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It's important to note that Prodigy isn't free. Nesta's Data Science Practice purchased 5 Prodigy seats, which are transferrable within the company.
```

Reviewer: its a weird gray zone as all their code for prodigy is in public repos? so perhaps just not free

Author: true

### 🤔 What can I used Prodigy for? Existing and custom recipes

You can apply Prodigy for a variety of use cases and tasks. For a [full list check the documentation](https://prodi.gy/docs/recipes). A couple worth mentioning and that we've already applied in our day to day work at Nesta:

- **Named Entity Recognition (NER)**: by tagging names and concepts in text according to a set of labels;
- **Text classification**: by assigning one of more categories to text;
- **Part-of-Speech tagging**: by tagging specific parts of speech in text;
- **Computer vision**: by annotating images;

If you want have multiple annotation tasks at once (*e.g.* NER and text classification in the same annotation), Prodigy also allows for that type of customisability.

You can also:
- Train models;
- Review annotations/resolve conflicts between annotators and compute inter-annotator agreement.

Each of the above tasks has a respective **recipe**: *"A Python function that can be executed from the command line and starts the Prodigy server for a specific task"*.

### 🧑‍🍳 Basic recipe & the respective front end

As mentioned above, you might want to use one of the existing **recipes**.

> For example, if you want have your annotators manually labelling text data identifying person, organisation and product entities, you can run:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, if you want to manually label text data to identify person, organisation and product entities, you can run:
```

`prodigy ner.manual ner_news en_core_web_sm ./news_headlines.jsonl --label PERSON,ORG,PRODUCT`

(If you want to run the code above, download the data from [here](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/explosion/prodigy-recipes/master/example-datasets/news_headlines.jsonl)).
If all runs well, you can then open `http://localhost:8080` and start annotating. We'll guide you through the different parts of the front end.

> ### ❗ Changing a basic recipe

Reviewer: really nice and simple

    ...

    return {
        "dataset": dataset, # database where annotations will be stored
        "stream": stream, # this is the stream of examples to be annotated
        "view_id": "classification", # view id i.e. annotation task to do
        "config": {
            ...
        },
    }
```

You can then run your recipe by doing:
```
prodigy name_of_your_new_recipe database_name .path_to_source_data_to_annotate  -F name_of_your_recipe_script.py
```

### 📥 Input and output files

Prodigy typically reads data from ***JSONL*** files.

JSONL or JSON lines is a text-based format that uses the `.jsonl` file extension. It's essentially the same as JSON format, except that newline character is used to delimit JSON data.
Example can be found in this [link](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/explosion/prodigy-recipes/master/example-datasets/news_headlines.jsonl).

After data has been annotated (*and saved!*) you can extract your annotated outputs by doing (for the example above):
`prodigy db-out ner_news > annotated_ner_news.jsonl`

You can also customise your output - we will cover this in the [multiple tasks recipe](multiple_tasks_recipe/).

### 🟢🔴 Pros & Cons of Prodigy

> Pros:
> - very easy to customise the front end (allowing for multiple types of annotations at once) and the output data;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Pros:
- very easy to customise the front end (allowing for multiple types of annotations at once) and the output data;
- you can take advantage of models-in-the-loop to train models while annotating;
```

Author: great shout!

Cons:
- Associated cost - only free for researchers;
- Initial learning curve;

### 🧑‍🤝‍🧑 Multiple annotators

What if you need multiple people to annotate data? *No problem!* The license allows for unlimited annotators. The easiest way to set that up is by:
- Creating an EC2 instance (reach out to our data engineering team if you're unsure of how to do this);
- Clone the repo where your Prodigy code lives;
- Run your Prodigy recipe inside the EC2 instance;
- Send the respective EC2 instance link to your annotators: `http://YY.YYY.YYY.YYY:8080/?session=<your_name>`
    - note the `?session=<your_name>` at the end of the URL, where each annotator should replace `<your_name>` by their name, so that we're able to 

> It is also possible to have different annotators annotating different instances. Check this video: xxx

Author: @india-kerle do you gave the link to the video?

> It is also possible to have different annotators annotating different instances. Check this video: xxx

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can also customise who labels what and why. Read more on [task routing here.](https://explosion.ai/blog/prodigy-2023-updates#task-router) 
```

Author: thank you <3 u da best

> ### 📚 Resources

Reviewer: soooo helpful to pull this all together

## 🪄 Prodigy have-a-go session

In this have-a-go session we will explore **Prodigy**, a data annotation tool by [Explosion AI](https://explosion.ai/) (the creators of [spaCy](https://spacy.io/)). Prodigy allows you to flexibly annotate data: text, images, video and audio.

In order to use Prodigy for your annotation tasks you need a license. We have 5 seats in the Data Science Practice, which are freely transferrable within the company. However, if you do need a license for a project, please join Nesta's `#dsp-prodigy` slack channel and ask for a license key.

### 🛠️ Setup

Run the following on your command line before the have-a-go session:
1. If you don't have this repo in your local computer run: `git clone https://github.com/nestauk/dap_tutorials.git`; Otherwise open this repo locally and run `git fetch origin`;
2. `cd YOUR_LOCAL_PATH/dap_tutorials/prodigy_demo/` where `YOUR_LOCAL_PATH` is your local path to your repos' folder;
2. `conda create --name prodigy_demo python=3.9`
3. `conda activate prodigy_demo`
4. `pip install -r requirements.txt`
5. `pip install -r ./llm_recipe/llm_requirements.txt` - specific requirements for the llm recipe;

> 6. `echo OPENAI_KEY=<YOUR_API_KEY> >> .env` where `YOUR_API_KEY` is your OpenAI API key (we will make one available for you);

Author: ```suggestion
6. `echo OPENAI_KEY="YOUR_API_KEY" >> .env` where `YOUR_API_KEY` is your OpenAI API key (we will make one available for you);
```

Author: @india-kerle not sure about this one but I think you need to use "" instead of <>, but perhaps both work?
